---
layouts: post
author: dasseclab
title: "So You Wanna Be A Network Engineer in 2023 (And Beyond)"

categories: network-engineering, careers
---
I noted in an earlier post that I spend a lot of time on Reddit's IT Career Questions subreddit (forum). One of the frequent questions there is about the viability of a career in network engineering, usually sparked by some think-piece about how **The Cloud** is going to decimate the field and make network engineers redundant. I figured I would write up something to show that networking, as a discipline with in Information Technology, is not going away and solid network engineering roles are still going to be around but that there are changes that folks will need to make to pivot into or continue on the path. Admittedly, this is based a lot on personal experience from places I've worked, other engineers I have interacted with, places I have interviewed and other things I have read but this is hardly a scientific study by any stretch.

So let's get that bias out of the way. I've worked for the last decade in a high tech company (see [CV]), the last bit as a network engineer but touching some network segment the entire time I was there. I have been, intermittently, interviewing over the last couple of years at *other* high tech companies - some are names you may know, some you might have to remember who they are - but I am also very interested in Internet-level problems, so some places I've been looking at and talking to are in the service provider space and range from global to regional. I am (hopefully) soon joining another high tech Internet company. Individual milage may vary but this is general advice based on what I've seen and experienced. 

# What's Changing
The biggest change coming is how workers will interact with their company's data. Reports of the prevalence of remote work possibilities are mixed at their overall prevalence and what impact remote work will play over the next five or ten years. Though it is, I think, safe to say that it is more prevalent after the COVID-19 pandemic of the early 2020s than it was before. Before, the workforce would report to an office, which would have network connectivity for devices and then connected to some data center, either their own in that building, separate colocation facility or even, third party cloud provider. With folks not working from an office outisde their home, connections into the corporate network may change from concentrating into a traditional VPN endpoint and migrate to a cloud-based Zero Trust network intermediary. Just these two scenarios show how network engineering roles are changing. There will be fewer office campus networks to deploy and maintain, and what office and campus networks remain will probably be smaller in scope. Not relying on hardware VPN concentrators and outsourcing to third party clouds, the network becomes more abstracted and locked in another vendor. But here is the beauty of networking - the rules of interoperability mean that the underlying principles are still the same as a traditional network. All that remains is that you need to cut the marketing wheat from the chaff. 

Indeed, **The Cloud** is *changing* the career outlook of network engineering. All of that abstraction of lower layers of the networking stack as a part of the cloud service has quite a few talking about how **cloud** is going to kill network engineering, which is maybe a little oversimplistic. After all, SREs and SWEs can do all of the network planning, security consideration and operation as a part of all their other tasks. Depending on the size of the shop, this might be best for business. After all, single-individual systems administrators operating everything in a traditional on-premise environment is a tale as old as time. Scale brings problems - those could be rapid growth pushes towards IP exhaustion (an IPv4 problem but definitely top of mind because these cases never push IPv6 adoption to further kill network engineers), multi-cloud tennancy, or mutli-cloud-region effects on IP prefix announcements. 